Add documentation for past modeling experiments (#496)
ccao-data/model-res-avm: docs/past-modeling-experiments.md

# Past Modeling Experiments

The Data Department has implemented and tested numerous improvements to the model-res-avm repository across modeling, infrastructure, reporting, and feature engineering. Not all tests and experiments have been incorporated into the final model. This document serves as a historical record of what has been explored, what was adopted, and what was set aside.

| Question / Goal | Issue | Findings / Output | Theme | Date |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | Should `bonsai` (the official Tidymodels/parsnip shim for LightGBM) replace `Lightsnip`? | [#16](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/16) | `{bonsai}` is promising but not ready for adoption — it lacks advanced LightGBM hyperparameters and early stopping. Sticking with `Lightsnip`. | 🔵 Modeling | 12-05-2023 |

Author: The colors only work when rendering, which I don't think anyone will actually do, so I just added a colored emoji.

> | Should `bonsai` (the official Tidymodels/parsnip shim for LightGBM) replace `Lightsnip`? | [#16](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/16) | `{bonsai}` is promising but not ready for adoption — it lacks advanced LightGBM hyperparameters and early stopping. Sticking with `Lightsnip`. | 🔵 Modeling | 12-05-2023 |

Reviewer: **[Nitpick, non-blocking]** Sorry for the extremely annoying nitpick, but can we use the more standard YYYY-MM-DD format for dates in this doc instead of DD-MM-YYYY, which has two downsides compared to YYYY-MM-DD:

1. Ambiguous as to whether the first two components represent the month or the day
2. Does not automatically sort in chronological order in the same way that YYYY-MM-DD does

Author: I switched the order of the number. It's currently sorted by issue number which doesn't necessarily relate to the date, which is more accurately date-closed.

> | Should `bonsai` (the official Tidymodels/parsnip shim for LightGBM) replace `Lightsnip`? | [#16](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/16) | `{bonsai}` is promising but not ready for adoption — it lacks advanced LightGBM hyperparameters and early stopping. Sticking with `Lightsnip`. | 🔵 Modeling | 12-05-2023 |

Reviewer: **[Nitpick, non-blocking]** "Modeling" feels to me to be overly general as a category in this context; this is a model experimentation doc, so presumably everything in this table is related to modeling in some way. What do you think about using the category label "Model Strucuture" instead so that we can better distinguish it from feature engineering? Ultimately I defer to Tim or Billy on the question of terminology.

Author: I added Model Architecture and Trining Process for a bit more specifity along with definitions on what is included in all the categories.

| Per recommendation from folks at posit::conf, test out the `Cubist` engine from the `rules` R package to see how it performs on our data. | [#37](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/37) | `Cubist` outperforms a linear model but not the current main model. Major drawbacks: single-threaded (very slow to train) and high memory usage (~250 GB), making a full grid search infeasible. | 🔵 Modeling | 12-25-2023 |
| We may be able to cross-validate significantly faster using racing-based `tune` methods, which are available in the `finetune` R package. Test cross-validation techniques: standard grid search (with sub-model trick), tune racing, and simulated annealing. | [#38](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/38) | All techniques were slower than Bayesian optimization with early stopping. Sub-model fitting works but requires fitting on the maximum number of iterations. Grid racing is faster than standard grid search but has the same limitation. Simulated annealing is too slow. Bayesian optimization remains the best approach. | 🔵 Modeling | 12-25-2023 |

> | Revisit ensemble/stacked modeling using the `stacks` package (prior attempt with Tidymodels was inconclusive due to immaturity of the tooling at the time). | [#46](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/46) | The added complexity of a stacked model has not been worth it compared to a standard boosted tree model in prior testing. | 🔵 Modeling | 12-06-2024 |

Reviewer: **[Suggestion, optional]** I think we should make it clear we abandoned this question without performing any investigation, lest we imply that we actually tested it like the rest of the experiments in this doc:

```suggestion
| Revisit ensemble/stacked modeling using the `stacks` package (prior attempt with Tidymodels was inconclusive due to immaturity of the tooling at the time). | [#46](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/46) | Abandoned without testing. Though we did not generate hard performance data, we decided that the added complexity of a stacked model was not worth it compared to a standard boosted tree model in principle. | 🔵 Modeling | 12-06-2024 |
```

| Test categorical embeddings (via `embed.tidymodels.org`) as an alternative to LightGBM's native categorical handling. | [#49](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/49) | Embeddings performed worse than LightGBM's native handling. The `embed` package also has heavy dependencies. Embeddings removed entirely (including from the linear model). | 🔵 Modeling | 01-27-2024 |

> | Test a homeowner exemption model feature as a proxy for owner-occupied status. | [#50](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/50) | Feature added [here](https://github.com/ccao-data/data-architecture/pull/296/changes). | 🟣 Model Features | 01-20-2024 |

Reviewer: **[Nitpick, blocking]** Some more detail on the results here, since I was involved in the implementation:

```suggestion
| Test a homeowner exemption model feature as a proxy for owner-occupied status. | [#50](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/50) | We found the feature to have predictive power, so we implemented it in https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/pull/179. However, we ended up removing it at the request of Valuations in https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/pull/339. | 🟣 Model Features | 01-20-2024 |
```

| Update cross-validation: revert to rolling-origin splitting, make it non-cumulative, and store per-fold predictions and residuals. | [#161](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/161) | New sliding-window CV function added with: switchable random (v-fold) vs. recency-based (sliding window) splitting via `validation_type`; non-cumulative folds; and overlapping fold support. | 🔵 Modeling | 01-16-2024 |
| Replace LightGBM's native missingness handling with more targeted imputation using `recipes::step_impute_*` functions. | [#162](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/162) | No meaningful performance difference. Missingness is limited and LightGBM handles it well natively. Advanced strategies (bagging, KNN) were too slow to test even on large AWS instances. | 🔵 Modeling | 01-29-2024 |

> | Test log-transforming the outcome (sale price) and skewed input features (income, building sqft, etc.) to improve model performance, particularly at the low end. | [#163](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/163) | Results are inconclusive. Slightly improves COD and low-end accuracy but worsens overall RMSE and high-end accuracy. See commit `8a7ae37` and runs `2024-01-24-sagacious-liz` / `2023-12-26-kind-caroline`. | 🔵 Modeling | 01-23-2024 |

Reviewer: **[Nitpick, non-blocking]** We can link directly to the commit for convenience:

```suggestion
| Test log-transforming the outcome (sale price) and skewed input features (income, building sqft, etc.) to improve model performance, particularly at the low end. | [#163](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/163) | Results are inconclusive. Slightly improves COD and low-end accuracy but worsens overall RMSE and high-end accuracy. See commit [`8a7ae37`](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/commit/8a7ae37888c7b3396184eab320e144f16c857fda) and runs `2024-01-24-sagacious-liz` / `2023-12-26-kind-caroline`. | 🔵 Modeling | 01-23-2024 |
```

| Explore strategies for modeling multi-card properties, which are excluded from training because sale price cannot be attributed per card. | [#228](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/228) | Two best strategies identified: `single card summing sqft` and `multi-card sqft aggregation training`. The aggregation training method gives the best performance for multi-card properties but slightly degrades single-card prediction quality. | 🔵 Modeling | 01-28-2025 |
| Test the effect of adding a random noise vector on feature importance and prediction stability. | [#272](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/272) | Adding random noise did not affect global performance stats but did expose prediction instability. A small number of predictions flipped between ~$100K and ~$10M, tracing back to erroneous high-value sales that had passed sales validation. Correcting the underlying sales stabilized predictions. | 🔵 Modeling | 01-22-2025 |

> | There may be data published by specific municipalities in the County — like Oak Park, Evanston, and Chicago — that we could use as features for PINs in those municipalities, leaving null for others. | [#376](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/376) | List of possible features provided in the issue, but no further action taken. | 🟣 Model Features | 05-22-2025 |

Reviewer 2: just a mental note to possibly revisit this idea "here may be data published by specific municipalities in the County — like Oak Park, Evanston, and Chicago — that we could use as features for PINs in those municipalities, leaving null for others. | [#376](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/376)"

| We may be able to cross-validate significantly faster using racing-based `tune` methods, which are available in the `finetune` R package. Test cross-validation techniques: standard grid search (with sub-model trick), tune racing, and simulated annealing. | [#38](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/38) | All techniques were slower than Bayesian optimization with early stopping. Sub-model fitting works but requires fitting on the maximum number of iterations. Grid racing is faster than standard grid search but has the same limitation. Simulated annealing is too slow. Bayesian optimization remains the best approach. | <span style="color:#4A90D9">Modeling</span> | 12-25-2023 |
| Revisit ensemble/stacked modeling using the `stacks` package (prior attempt with Tidymodels was inconclusive due to immaturity of the tooling at the time). | [#46](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/46) | The added complexity of a stacked model has not been worth it compared to a standard boosted tree model in prior testing. | <span style="color:#4A90D9">Modeling</span> | 12-06-2024 |

> | Re-add a linear baseline model (using `glmnet`) for comparison against the tree-based main model. | [#48](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/48) | Linear model added using `recipes` for preprocessing. Outputs a `pred_card_initial_fmv_lin` column and a `stage="test_linear"` partition in the performance table. Reporting updated to include linear model in ratio curves, stats table, and predicted vs. actual plots. | <span style="color:#4A90D9">Modeling</span> | 01-04-2024 |

Reviewer 3: This doesn't strike me as an experiment yielding information that led to a decision about modeling that we're trying to persist, I'd say remove it.

| Explore strategies for modeling multi-card properties, which are excluded from training because sale price cannot be attributed per card. | [#228](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/228) | Two best strategies identified: `single card summing sqft` and `multi-card sqft aggregation training`. The aggregation training method gives the best performance for multi-card properties but slightly degrades single-card prediction quality. | <span style="color:#4A90D9">Modeling</span> | 01-28-2025 |
| Test the effect of adding a random noise vector on feature importance and prediction stability. | [#272](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/272) | Adding random noise did not affect global performance stats but did expose prediction instability. A small number of predictions flipped between ~$100K and ~$10M, tracing back to erroneous high-value sales that had passed sales validation. Correcting the underlying sales stabilized predictions. | <span style="color:#4A90D9">Modeling</span> | 01-22-2025 |

> | Verify the pipeline is fully deterministic (identical inputs → identical outputs) by running it twice and diffing the `dvc.lock` files. | [#273](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/273) | Consistent seeds are used throughout. Two full local runs produced identical output file hashes. Pipeline confirmed deterministic. | <span style="color:#E07B39">Infrastructure</span> | 12-20-2024 |

Reviewer 3: This doesn't strike me as an experiment yielding information that led to a decision about modeling that we're trying to persist, I'd say remove it.

As Jean has noted previously, if this sheet turns into tracking every avm PR we put up to add a feature to the pipeline it's gonna be a bear to maintain. Better to use it as a catalog for why we did or didn't make a _methodological_ change to the model.

| Predictive models with a lot of heterogeneity in the training data often include features that measure the dispersion/variation of each predictor (e.g. standard deviation of year built, aggregated within 1,000 meters). | [#274](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/274) | Tests adding features based on the standard deviation of continuous variables had essentially no effect. | <span style="color:#8E44AD">Model Features</span> | 01-22-2025 |

> | There may be data published by specific municipalities in the County — like Oak Park, Evanston, and Chicago — that we could use as features for PINs in those municipalities, leaving null for others. | [#376](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-res-avm/issues/376) | List of possible features provided in the issue, but no further action taken. | <span style="color:#8E44AD">Model Features</span> | 05-22-2025 |

Reviewer 3: I'm honestly not even convinced we need to catalog adding features. We can just look at `params.yaml` to see which features are in the model. I'd rather see features that we _removed_ here and why we removed them.

Author: K I removed the added features, linear model and model determinism. It's a bit hard to see what you are referencing @wrridgeway in the comments, so can you just verify that's what you were mentioning?

Reviewer 3: It's looking good to me!
